mind your decisions i'm presh talwalkar
the 1947 stanford competitive
examination
included a version of this problem
i bought 72 identical items
each item had the same cost and the cost
was a whole
number of dollars the total cost
was a five digit number you don't know
the first
or last digit but the middle three
digits are six
seven and nine how much did each item
cost
pause the video if you'd like to give
this problem a try
and when you're ready keep watching to
learn how to solve this problem
[Music]
i will illustrate the answer using two
different methods
let's get started with a brute force
calculation
the total number of items i bought is
equal to 72.
if we multiply that by the cost per item
we will get the total cost of all items
we can then vary the item cost and that
will affect the total cost
we're looking for a five digit number
where the middle three digits are equal
to six
seven and nine eventually we will come
across the possibility
of thirty six thousand seven hundred and
ninety two
therefore the item cost is equal to five
hundred and eleven dollars
while this method is useful with today's
computational methods
we should remember that in 1947 people
didn't have such powerful computers like
we do today
the other issue with this method is it
doesn't tell us anything about the
structure of this problem
so now let's solve the problem using
logic to understand it in another way
the key insight is that 72 is equal to 8
times 9.
this means the total cost must be
divisible by both
eight and nine so let's recall some
divisibility rules
we'll get started with the divisibility
rule for eight a number is divisible by
eight
if its last three digits are we have a
five digit number
and we'll focus on the last three digits
recall that 800 is equal to 8 times 100
if we subtract 8 from both sides we get
is equal to 8 times 99 if we subtract 8
again from both sides
we get 784 is equal to 8 times 98.
seeing that two of the digits must be
equal to 7
and 9 the only possibility that works is
therefore the last digit must be equal
to 2.
let's now go back to our five digit
number and suppose the first digit is
equal to a
let's recall the divisibility rule for
nine
a number is divisible by nine if the sum
of its digits is divisible by nine
we will therefore take the sum of these
five digits
then seven plus nine plus two is equal
to eighteen
notice that eighteen is a multiple of
nine so we can eliminate that
we then want a plus six to be a multiple
of nine
the only way this will happen is if a
plus six is equal to nine
because a is a digit between 1 and 9.
this means a is equal to 3 and that's
the first digit
so our five digit number will be 36
792 we can then divide by 72
to get the cost per item and that'll be
511.
for completeness let's put in the dollar
symbols
therefore our answer is 511 dollars
thanks for making us one of the best
communities on youtube
see you next episode of mind your
decisions where we solve the world
problems one video at a time
[Music]
you